.TH RECIPE-RECIPE 5 "2026-03-13" "recipe 0.1.4" "Recipe File Format"
.SH NAME
recipe-recipe \- authoring format and lifecycle model for recipe files
.SH OVERVIEW
A recipe file is a Rhai script that declares a top-level \fBctx\fR map and one or
more lifecycle hooks. The executor persists updated \fBctx\fR state back into the
recipe source file after successful phases.
.PP
This page documents the behavior implemented by the current executor, not the
broader future-facing requirements spec.
.SH RECIPE STRUCTURE
The minimum useful recipe shape is:
.nf
let ctx = #{
    name: "jq",
    version: "1.7.1",
    url: "https://example.invalid/jq",
    sha256: "replace-me",
    downloaded: "",
};

fn is_installed(ctx) {
    if !is_file(join_path(env("HOME"), ".local/bin/jq")) { throw "not installed"; }
    ctx
}

fn is_acquired(ctx) {
    if ctx.downloaded == "" || !is_file(ctx.downloaded) { throw "not acquired"; }
    ctx
}

fn acquire(ctx) {
    mkdir(BUILD_DIR);
    let downloaded = download(ctx.url, join_path(BUILD_DIR, "jq"));
    verify_sha256(downloaded, ctx.sha256);
    ctx.downloaded = downloaded;
    ctx
}

fn install(ctx) {
    let dst = join_path(join_path(env("HOME"), ".local"), "bin/jq");
    copy_file(ctx.downloaded, dst);
    chmod(dst, 0o755);
    ctx
}

fn cleanup(ctx, reason) {
    ctx
}
.fi
.SH CTX CONTRACT
.TP
\fBCanonical declaration\fR
The persistence layer looks for the exact byte sequence:
.br
\fBlet ctx = #{\fR
.PP
\fBlet ctx=#{\fR and other variants can execute, but persistence will not find
them.
.TP
\fBPersistent value types\fR
Strings, integers, booleans, and \fB()\fR round-trip cleanly. Richer values may be
stringified and written back as strings. Keep persistent \fBctx\fR values simple.
.TP
\fBPersistence behavior\fR
The executor writes updated \fBctx\fR back into the recipe source file after
successful phases. This allows resume behavior across repeated runs.
.SH LIFECYCLE HOOKS
.TP
\fBis_installed(ctx)\fR
Return updated \fBctx\fR when the install state is already satisfied. Throw to
request install work.
.TP
\fBis_built(ctx)\fR
Return updated \fBctx\fR when build outputs are already present. Throw to request
build work.
.TP
\fBis_acquired(ctx)\fR
Return updated \fBctx\fR when sources or downloads are already present. Throw to
request acquire work.
.TP
\fBacquire(ctx)\fR
Download or otherwise fetch source material.
.TP
\fBbuild(ctx)\fR
Transform acquired inputs into installable outputs.
.TP
\fBinstall(ctx)\fR
Place files, symlinks, configuration, or other install state.
.TP
\fBremove(ctx)\fR
Undo install state for \fBrecipe remove\fR.
.TP
\fBcleanup(ctx, reason)\fR
Cleanup hook used by both automatic phase cleanup and manual
\fBrecipe cleanup\fR.
.SH HOOK ORDER
Normal install flow:
.IP "1." 4
Run \fBis_installed(ctx)\fR.
.IP "2." 4
If it passes, stop.
.IP "3." 4
Run \fBis_built(ctx)\fR.
.IP "4." 4
If it passes, skip both \fBbuild(ctx)\fR and \fBis_acquired(ctx)\fR.
.IP "5." 4
If it throws, run \fBis_acquired(ctx)\fR.
.IP "6." 4
Run \fBacquire(ctx)\fR only if acquire is needed or the hook is missing.
.IP "7." 4
If \fBbuild(ctx)\fR exists, rerun \fBis_built(ctx)\fR after acquire.
.IP "8." 4
Run \fBbuild(ctx)\fR only if build is still needed.
.IP "9." 4
Run \fBinstall(ctx)\fR.
.IP "10." 4
Run \fBcleanup(ctx, reason)\fR on success and failure paths.
.SH RETURN VALUES AND STATE
Checks and phases return an updated \fBctx\fR map. The executor uses that returned
map as the input to the next phase. A check can therefore rediscover paths or
recompute derived state even when it skips work.
.PP
Missing checks mean work is needed:
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBis_installed\fR means install is needed
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBis_built\fR means build is needed
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBis_acquired\fR means acquire is needed
.PP
Missing phases:
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBbuild(ctx)\fR is allowed for prebuilt payload
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBremove(ctx)\fR means \fBrecipe remove\fR will fail
.IP "\[bu]" 4
missing \fBcleanup(ctx, reason)\fR is not appropriate for normal repo usage; use
a no-op hook if no cleanup is required
.SH PATHS AND FILES
Recipes currently receive these commonly used bindings and environment-derived
values through the executor:
.TP
\fBBUILD_DIR\fR
Work directory for acquire/build/install steps.
.TP
\fBRECIPE_DIR\fR
Directory containing the current recipe.
.TP
\fBARCH\fR
Current architecture string.
.TP
\fBNPROC\fR
Available CPU count.
.TP
\fBRPM_PATH\fR
RPM path string used by some package-oriented recipes.
.PP
Dependency and base-recipe execution may also expose \fBBASE_RECIPE_DIR\fR and
\fBTOOLS_PREFIX\fR.
.SH FAILURE SEMANTICS
Checks must \fBthrow\fR to request work. Returning \fBfalse\fR is not the contract.
.PP
Helpers generally raise an evaluation error on failure. Shelling out with
\fBshell()\fR or \fBexec()\fR does not silently suppress failure; recipes should
check return codes or use helpers that fail directly when required.
.SH MINIMAL EXAMPLE
.nf
let ctx = #{
    name: "hello",
    installed: false,
};

fn is_installed(ctx) {
    if !ctx.installed { throw "not installed"; }
    ctx
}

fn install(ctx) {
    ctx.installed = true;
    ctx
}

fn cleanup(ctx, reason) {
    ctx
}
.fi
.SH EXTENDS
Recipes may declare:
.nf
//! extends: linux-base.rhai
.fi
.PP
Behavior:
.IP "\[bu]" 4
Base recipe is compiled first, then merged with the child AST.
.IP "\[bu]" 4
Child functions with the same name and arity override base functions.
.IP "\[bu]" 4
Top-level statements run base-first, then child.
.IP "\[bu]" 4
Recursive \fBextends\fR is rejected.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBrecipe\fR(1),
\fBrecipe-helpers\fR(7)
