.TH RECIPE 1 "2026-03-12" "recipe 0.1.3" "Recipe Manual"
.SH NAME
recipe \- local-first package recipe executor for LevitateOS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B recipe
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fICOMMAND\fR> [\fICOMMAND OPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B recipe install
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] [\fIINSTALL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe remove
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe cleanup
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-\-reason\fR \fIREASON\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe isinstalled
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe isbuilt
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe isacquired
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe list
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B recipe info
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIRECIPE\fR>
.br
.B recipe hash
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR] <\fIFILE\fR>
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrecipe\fR executes Rhai-based package recipes. Recipes persist state in a
top-level \fBctx\fR map inside the recipe source file itself. The current executor
is explicit and local-first: recipes call helpers with concrete paths and phase
functions return an updated \fBctx\fR map.
.PP
The CLI is designed to keep stdout machine-readable. Final \fBctx\fR JSON is
written to stdout by default, while logs, helper progress, shell output, and
other human-oriented diagnostics go to stderr.
.SH DEFAULT PATHS
.TP
\fBRecipes directory\fR
\fB~/.local/share/recipe/recipes\fR
.br
The exact default follows XDG rules:
\fB$RECIPE_PATH\fR if set, otherwise
\fB$XDG_DATA_HOME/recipe/recipes\fR, otherwise
\fB~/.local/share/recipe/recipes\fR.
.TP
\fBBuild directory\fR
Temporary directory if \fB\-\-build-dir\fR is not set.
.TP
\fBLLM profiles\fR
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/recipe/llm.toml\fR or
\fB~/.config/recipe/llm.toml\fR.
.SH RECIPE RESOLUTION
Commands that take \fI<RECIPE>\fR resolve it in this order:
.IP "1." 4
Absolute path, if it exists.
.IP "2." 4
Relative path from the current working directory, if it exists.
.IP "3." 4
Path joined under \fB\-\-recipes-path\fR.
.IP "4." 4
Same name with \fB.rhai\fR appended under \fB\-\-recipes-path\fR.
.PP
Example: \fBrecipe install kitty\fR will look for
\fB~/.local/share/recipe/recipes/kitty\fR and then
\fB~/.local/share/recipe/recipes/kitty.rhai\fR unless
\fB\-\-recipes-path\fR overrides that directory.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBinstall\fR
Run the normal install flow for a recipe. This is the main command for recipe
authoring and debugging.
.TP
\fBremove\fR
Run the recipe's \fBremove(ctx)\fR hook and persist the resulting \fBctx\fR.
.TP
\fBcleanup\fR
Run the recipe's \fBcleanup(ctx, reason)\fR hook manually.
.TP
\fBisinstalled\fR
Evaluate \fBis_installed(ctx)\fR manually.
.TP
\fBisbuilt\fR
Evaluate \fBis_built(ctx)\fR manually.
.TP
\fBisacquired\fR
Evaluate \fBis_acquired(ctx)\fR manually.
.TP
\fBlist\fR
List recipes under the recipes directory.
.TP
\fBinfo\fR
Show recipe metadata derived from the recipe's \fBctx\fR block.
.TP
\fBhash\fR
Compute \fBsha256\fR, \fBsha512\fR, and \fBblake3\fR hashes for a file.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-recipes-path\fR \fIPATH\fR
Recipes directory used for name lookup, listing, and default recipe resolution.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-build-dir\fR \fIPATH\fR
Build directory used for acquire/build/install work. If omitted, a temporary
directory is created.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-define\fR \fIKEY=VALUE\fR
Inject a define into Rhai scope before execution. Repeatable.
.TP
\fB\-\-json-output\fR \fIPATH\fR
Write final \fBctx\fR JSON to a file instead of stdout.
.TP
\fB\-\-machine-events\fR
Emit machine-readable hook events as JSON objects.
.TP
\fB\-\-llm-profile\fR \fINAME\fR
Select an LLM profile from \fBrecipe/llm.toml\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-no-persist-ctx\fR
Do not write updated \fBctx\fR back into the recipe source file.
.SH INSTALL OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-autofix\fR
Attempt to patch build/install failures using the configured LLM provider.
.TP
\fB\-\-autofix-attempts\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum number of patch attempts per failing install step. Default: \fB2\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-autofix-cwd\fR \fIPATH\fR
Working directory used for LLM invocation and patch application.
.TP
\fB\-\-autofix-prompt-file\fR \fIPATH\fR
Extra instructions appended to the built-in autofix prompt.
.TP
\fB\-\-autofix-allow-path\fR \fIPATH\fR
Allowed root for patched file paths. Repeatable. If omitted, the repo root is
used.
.SH OUTPUT CONTRACT
.TP
\fBstdout\fR
Final \fBctx\fR JSON, unless \fB\-\-json-output\fR is used.
.TP
\fBstderr\fR
Progress logs, phase banners, helper traces, shell output, and other
human-readable diagnostics.
.PP
For machine use, prefer \fB\-\-json-output\fR when running recipes that call
\fBshell*\fR helpers or external commands.
.SH HOOK MODEL
Recipes are Rhai scripts with a top-level \fBctx\fR map and optional lifecycle
hooks. The normal install flow is:
.IP "1." 4
\fBis_installed(ctx)\fR
.IP "2." 4
\fBis_built(ctx)\fR
.IP "3." 4
\fBis_acquired(ctx)\fR
.IP "4." 4
\fBacquire(ctx)\fR if needed
.IP "5." 4
\fBbuild(ctx)\fR if needed and defined
.IP "6." 4
\fBinstall(ctx)\fR
.IP "7." 4
\fBcleanup(ctx, reason)\fR on success or failure
.PP
Checks are throw-based gates, not boolean predicates. A check should return an
updated \fBctx\fR when the phase is already satisfied, and \fBthrow\fR when work
is still needed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
recipe install kitty
recipe install ./recipes/kitty.rhai --define VERSION=1.2.3
recipe install kitty --autofix --autofix-attempts 3
recipe isbuilt kitty --no-persist-ctx
recipe list
recipe hash ./downloads/foo.tar.xz
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBrecipe-recipe\fR(5),
\fBrecipe-helpers\fR(7)
